Step 2-A: Exploring Data
After you've put together the data
that you need for your application,
you might be tempted to immediately
build models to analyze the data.
Resist this temptation.
The first step after getting
your data is to explore it.
Exploring data is a part of
the two-step data preparation process.
You want to do some
preliminary investigation
in order to gain a better understanding of
the specific characteristics of your data.
In this step, you'll be looking for
things like correlations,
general trends, and outliers.
Without this step, you will not be
able to use the data effectively.
Correlation graphs can be used
to explore the dependencies
between different variables in the data.
Graphing the general trends of
variables will show you if there is
a consistent direction in which the values
of these variables are moving towards,
like sales prices going up or down.
In statistics, an outlier is a data point
that's distant from other data points.
Plotting outliers will
help you double check for
errors in the data due to measurements.
In some cases, outliers that are not
errors might make you find a rare event.
Additionally, summary statistics provide
numerical values to describe your data.
Summary statistics are quantities
that capture various characteristics
of a set of values with a single number or
a small set of numbers.
Some basic summary statistics
that you should compute for
your data set are mean, median,
range, and standard deviation.
Mean and median are measures of
the location of a set of values.
Mode is the value that occurs
most frequently in your data set.
And range and standard deviation
are measures of spread in your data.
Looking at these measures will give you
an idea of the nature of your data.
They can tell you if there's
something wrong with your data.
For example, if the range of the values
for age in your data includes
negative numbers, or
a number much greater than 100,
there's something suspicious in
the data that needs to be examined.
Visualization techniques also
provide a quick and effective, and
overall a very useful way to look at
data in this preliminary analysis step.
A heat map, such as the one shown here,
can quickly give you the idea
of where the hotspots are.
Many other different types
of graphs can be used.
Histograms show that
the distribution of the data and
can show skewness or unusual dispersion.
Boxplots are another type of plot for
showing data distribution.
Line graphs are useful for seeing how
values in your data change over time.
Spikes in the data are also easy to spot.
Scatter plots can show you
correlation between two variables.
Overall, there are many types
of graph to visualize data.
They are very useful in helping
you understand the data you have.
In summary, what you get by
exploring your data is a better
understanding of the complexity of
the data you have to work with.
This, in turn,
will guide the rest of your process.